uncanny-gap.txt
Created Tue Nov 24 08:27:02 AKST 2009
by Raymond E. Marcil



While watching Science of the Movies on the Discovery, on TiVo on Nov 24, 2009, saw a great 
segment on the "uncanny gap".  Basically CGI of human beings has improved on a study curve 
for a number of years.  However, an "uncanny gap" is reached where no amount of 
enhancements improve the portrayal of the person.  In fact minor "impovements" make the 
realism much worse.  The realism curve drops off sharply. Within the last year the gap 
was bridged.

The Science of the Movies show a Hollywood special effects company that built a buckyball 
shaped cage with many lights on each vertex for illuminating the subject.  Multiple photos 
and multiple frequencies of light to capture the tonal and texture qualities of the face.
Remember 67 photos being used to capture facial qualities.  All of this then went into a 
computer with polynomial map of the face with applied tone and features.

FIXME: Unable to track down the uncanny gap episode.


Googling definitions of anthropomorphism, I discovered a Wikipedia article on a fascinating 
phenomenon known as the Uncanny Valley:

'The Uncanny Valley is a principle of robotics concerning the emotional response of humans 
to robots and other non-human entities. It was theorized by Japanese roboticist Masahiro 
Mori in the late 1970s through psychological experiments in which he measured human 
response to robots of varying degrees of anthropomorphism.

'This principle states that as a robot is made more humanlike in its appearance and motion, 
the emotional response of a human being to the robot will become increasingly positive and 
empathetic, until a point is reached at which the response suddenly becomes strongly 
repulsive. Thenceforth, as the appearance and motion are made to be indistinguishable to 
that of a human being, the emotional response becomes positive once more and approaches 
human-human empathy levels.'

Okay, that curve sort of makes sense. We like ourselves, and we like our dogs, but we don't 
like our fellow humans. At least, that's what the Scots say about the English.

Wikipedia again: 'This gap of repulsive response aroused by a robot with appearance and 
motion between a "barely-human" and "fully human" entity is called the Uncanny Valley. The 
name harkens to the notion that a robot which is "almost human" will seem overly "strange" 
to a human being and thus will fail to evoke the requisite empathetic response required for 
productive human-robot interaction.

'The phenomenon can be explained by the notion that if an entity is sufficiently 
non-humanlike, then the humanlike characteristics will tend to stand out and be noticed 
easily, generating empathy. On the other hand, if the entity is "almost human", then the 
non-human characteristics will be the ones that stand out, leading to a feeling of 
"strangeness" in the human viewer.'

Ah, now that's beginning to work for me in other ways. 'The darkest hour is just before 
dawn', and the almost-human is the least human. Being a literary sort of guy, I'm also 
tempted to plot the uncanny valley to the gap that divides simile from metaphor, the gap 
between like and is. We're comfortable saying a photograph is 'like' us. We're comfortable 
saying a mirror image 'is' us. But something that's both photo and mirror (like a live 
video image of ourselves we glimpse in a TV shop window) exists in the uncanny gap between 
simile and metaphor, and can sometimes horrify us as a result.

The Uncanny Valley idea also chimes with Freud's narcissism of minor differences ('the 
phenomenon that it is precisely communities with adjoining territories, and related to each 
other in other ways as well, who are engaged in constant feuds and in ridiculing each 
other'), or Derrida's strategic valorisation of the suppressed supplementary term of any 
binary.

Wikipedia continues: 'Although originally applied only to robotics, the principle has been 
applied to computer-animation characters. The Uncanny Valley was considered by some to be 
the reason behind the difficulty in creating computer-animated characters. The principle 
leads to the conclusion that to generate a positive emotional response in human beings, it 
is often better to include fewer human characteristics in the entity, lest it fall into the 
Uncanny Valley.'

This assumes that we as storytellers want to avoid the uncanny and encourage empathy. But 
what if we want to evoke it? What, in other words, if we're into Brecht rather than Method, 
into alienation rather than identification, into defamiliarization rather than 
familiarization, ostranenie rather than repetition?

The place where the 'credibility gap' or the 'uncanny valley' occurs is not at the point 
furthest from the truth, but at the point closest to it. When something is almost credible, 
it lacks credibility. When it's completely incredible, it has an odd sort of believability. 
Perhaps this explains the idea that someone like John Kerry, famously decorated for 
bravery, can be rubbished for cowardice, whereas Bush, who everybody knows skived off his 
military service, can seem 'brave' and 'resolute' to many. Once a thesis gets overstated, 
the antithesis has a tendency to rush in, even if the truth lies closer to the thesis than 
the antithesis.

If, plunged deep into the Uncanny Valley, it's easy to see the other as truly other rather 
than as a version of oneself, perhaps we can overcome aversion? It's often suggested that a 
world in which we are 'all brothers' and 'live as one' would be a world without killing. 
That may be true, if the unity is total. But if we miss that goal and simply achieve a 
world of 'minor differences', we're in trouble. I believe that divergence, not convergence, 
is the answer. We need to value our differences from other people, not our similarities to 
them. 'Double strangeness' might be the way out of the murderous narcissism of minor 
differences. Perhaps, with the help of the uncanny, 'ape shall never kill ape'.

from: livejournal.com/


Links
=====
Science of the Movies
Hosted by Nar
http://science.discovery.com/tv/science-movies/science-movies.html

Uncanny valley
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Great info on the uncanny valley.  Many good references.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncanny_valley

The Uncanny Valley
Interesting page with reference to wikipedia page.
http://imomus.livejournal.com/53978.html
